Welcome to session 436,
Advanced Core Data Features.
Like the slide said,
this is a confidential session,
so please refrain from taking pictures,
camera phones, filming, microphones,
that kind of stuff.
I am...
Melissa Turner,
I'll be joined on stage later by
some of my co-conspirators in the
code that we're about to show you,
Ben Trumbull and Chris Hansen.
So what is Core Data?
For those of you who didn't
make yesterday's session,
Core Data is a model-driven object graph
management and persistency framework.
What does that mean?
Basically,
it's a framework that gives you
scalable object lifecycle management,
gives you automatic undo, redo,
tracks changes in your object graph.
I suppose I should say at this point,
object graph is a fancy way for
saying collection of objects that
actually have pointers to each other.
It gives you-- ensures data
consistency and correctness.
And the persistence part will
allow you to read or write
to various types of files.
And we're integrated with the
Cocoa bindings to give you
user interface synchronization.
Why should you use Core Data?
Well, it relieves you from having
to reinvent the wheel.
There's a lot of persistence
frameworks out there.
I'm sure many of you have
actually written one.
You don't need to redo
it over and over again.
There's nothing terribly
app-specific about it.
We give you a choice
of persistent stores,
so you can pick the one that best suits
the type of application you're writing.
One of the big advantages is
it prefers your application
for future features in Cocoa.
If we're going to add new stuff,
it's most likely going to be tied in
with the stuff we've already written,
so if you're using the
stuff we've already written,
you'll probably get those
new features for free.
It gives you a faster
development lifecycle.
Writing an object graph
management or persistence
framework is not a simple thing.
Trust us,
we've been working on it for months.
We'd like to spare you that and
let you concentrate on writing
the stuff you want to write.
Because it's there,
it's used by a number of other people,
it's a lot more likely to be robust.
Other people are going to find the bugs.
You don't have to do it yourself.
In this session, we're going to sort of
give you an overview of the
architecture of the system,
talk about the individual components.
We're going to talk about
how they're all put together.
We're going to talk about some
of the stuff you want to do,
or if you're advanced,
you're going to want
to do with the stack.
And we're going to give you a few,
as we go through, tips and tricks,
things you should know,
things you should know not to do.
So what are the pieces of
the Core Data architecture?
Well, we're built-- there's
four basic components.
There's predicates, models,
managed objects in the
managed object context,
and there's object stores
with the store coordinator.
And like I said,
we have some integration with the
Cocoa documents and controllers.
Core Data Xcode UI can be used
to graphically create models and
configure how Core Data is going
to work in your application.
Here's the basic architecture.
Up at the top, which we're not going to
talk about in this session,
is the user interface, which is connected
with the binding stuff.
Below that,
we've got the controller layer.
Again,
we're not going to talk much about that.
Middle part's where we
start getting interesting.
That's the Managed Object Context.
That is sort of the core of the object
graph management part of the system.
It manages the managed objects.
We've got a persistent store
coordinator living below that,
which talks to a model and a data file.
Well,
I've mentioned models several times.
They're sort of really the most
important part of the system.
They're the blueprint.
They're the thing that describes what
data exists in your application and how
those objects are related to each other.
It tells you what
interactions you've got going,
what needs to be updated if
something else is updated,
all that kind of stuff.
The model is really
sort of the description.
It contains all the really important
application logic of your system.
It's the foundation for managed objects,
and you can create it from
Xcode or programmatically.
Xcode gives you the
basic development tools,
the thing you use up front.
It's nice, it's spiffy, it's graphical,
it's visual.
You can see what you're actually doing.
Often that's not quite enough,
and you want to make some minor
runtime tweaks to the model,
so we let you create them
programmatically or modify
them programmatically if
you've already created them.
Why do we use a model?
It's a foundation for
data-driven development.
What that means is you can concentrate on
the data architecture of your application
rather than the control flow through it.
You think about what objects you have,
how they interact with each other,
as opposed to, well,
if I click this button here,
then I need to do this in this object,
and if that then, or while,
don't need to think of any of that.
You just concentrate on the objects.
We take care of the rest of it.
The model, as I said,
defines this data architecture,
and what this allows you to do,
as some of you saw in yesterday's
session or Bertrand's keynote,
is get behavior without writing code.
What's in a model?
Some of these terms are going to be
familiar to those of you who are familiar
with entity relationship modeling,
but a model contains entities
which have attributes,
relationships, and fetch properties.
It also contains templates
of fetch requests,
which I'll talk about all of this later,
and it contains
configuration information.
This is the classes these things map to.
This is what you should be looking for
in the API headers you've got on disk.
Entities map to instances
of NSEntityDescription,
attributes to NSAttributeDescription,
relationships are
NSRelationshipDescription,
fetched properties are NSFetchedProperty,
and fetched request templates
are NSFetchedRequest.
Configurations, well,
those are just strings usually
with sets associated with them.
NSNC description is loosely analogous
to class definition for data type.
It supports inheritance,
which means you can
have abstract entities,
things that are never actually
instantiated in your application.
Entity inheritance is not necessarily
the same as class inheritance.
You can have an entity inheritance
hierarchy that does not map one-to-one
with a class inheritance hierarchy.
As a matter of fact,
you can map everything to
NSManagedObject if you want and skip
having a class hierarchy entirely.
It has multiple property types,
the two most important of which
are attributes and relationships.
And they're editable
only until first use.
This is something important to remember.
Once you fetch data into an application
using an NSEntity description,
you can no longer change
that NSEntity description.
It gets too complicated trying to figure
out what we're supposed to do with that
extra pieces of data and new stuff,
old stuff.
You can't do it.
You'll basically have exceptions thrown.
And by the way,
that's true of all the classes I'm going
to talk about in the model section.
NSAttributeDescription is analogous
to a field containing an NSValueType.
We support all the standard NSValueTypes,
or standard NSDataValueTypes.
You can provide a default value
using an NSAttributeDescription,
and you can set validation rules.
This attribute has a
minimum value of this,
has a maximum value of that, must have,
for strings,
can set a wildcarded pattern,
can set a maximum string length,
that kind of thing.
Attributes can be optional,
which means they don't
necessarily have to appear.
And they can be transient,
which is a concept that makes
a lot more sense when you think
about it in the context of
there being a persistent layer.
But a transient attribute is
one which is managed by the
object graph management layer,
but which is not actually persistent.
This is the kind of attribute you'd
use for storing caching information,
stuff that's derived at
runtime and can be recomputed,
but that you just want to keep around
for convenience and speed purposes.
It's pretty much a scratch pad.
Relationship descriptions.
Relationship descriptions, well,
those are pointers to one
or more managed objects.
They can be one-to-one,
they can be one-to-many.
They support minimum and maximum counts.
This bicycle has two wheels.
This vehicle has at most 18 wheels.
You can specify both of these values.
A relationship usually defines
an inverse relationship.
There's some rare contexts
in which it doesn't,
and if you don't know the specifics,
you want to define an
inverse relationship.
It specifies a delete rule,
what should happen when
an object is deleted.
The options are nullify,
when this object is deleted,
delete the objects in
all of its relationships.
Cascade?
No.
Nullify is when this object is deleted,
just null out the back pointers
in all of the relationships.
Cascade is delete all of the
children in its relationships.
Deny, if this object has any
objects in its relationships,
you're not allowed to delete it.
No action means don't bother
touching anything on the other
end of the relationships.
It also allows validation
rules like the attributes.
And like the attributes,
it can be optional or
it can be transient.
NSFetch property is
kind of a special beast.
It allows you to make a unidirectional
link between an entity and a query.
This allows a single managed object
to have a loose relationship with
a collection of other objects,
and that relationship is not managed.
It's always too many because we
can never tell how many objects
the fetch is going to bring back.
And it uses an NSFetch request,
which we'll talk about next,
to specify the query.
The concepts of optional and transient
don't really apply here since,
well, it's a query.
NSFetchRequest is an object-oriented
representation of a query operation.
It specifies a query that
you want to search for,
or an entity that you want to search for,
a predicate that you're going to
use to define which instances of
that entity you're looking for,
a sort descriptor that tells you what
order you want them to come back in.
Fetch requests in the
model are named templates,
which means that they contain
predicates that can have
variable expressions in them.
If it has a variable expression,
you need to do a variable substitution
at runtime before you use it.
And you get an instance of a fetch
request from the template from the
model using fetch request from template
with name set substitution variables.
And one thing to note is
that these fetch requests,
the predicates will be evaluated
in the store where possible.
So if you have an SQL light,
you can do that.
If you have a SQL light store,
the predicate will actually be
translated down into a where clause,
which SQL light will actually run.
Some of the other stores
actually do in-memory queries.
Configuration is essentially a named
collection of NSEntity descriptions.
It's typically mapped to
a single persistent store.
This collection of entities
is mapped to this store.
This other collection of
entities is mapped to this store.
Something to note is that a single entity
can belong to multiple configurations.
So you can get instances,
managed objects of a given
entity from multiple stores.
I can pull an address from
LDAP or from AddressBook.
I can get a song in my playlist
from my local repository,
or it can be something I pulled
from a rendezvous store.
The programmatic interaction with
models is actually pretty simple.
If you want to load a model,
we have NSManagedObjectModel
init with contents of URL.
Sometimes you want to merge multiple
models that exist in multiple frameworks.
We have init with contents of
URL and then model by merging models.
Something to note is that this will
get a little bit upset if you have
multiple entities with the same name.
But if you have configurations
with the same name in each model,
the entities in those configurations will
be merged into one uber configuration.
Programatically creating
a model is very simple.
It just takes a lot of steps.
First thing you're going to want to do
probably is create an entity description.
Here we're creating an album.
You set the name on it to album.
Most albums have attributes,
so we're going to give this one a title.
Just create an attribute description,
set its name to title,
set its type to string.
Create a song,
since albums usually have songs.
It's another entity.
Just give it a name.
Create a relationship.
The entity comes from the entity album
and sets the destination entity songs.
This means that we're creating a
relationship from the album to songs.
An album has multiple songs.
Set the relationship.
Set the properties on the album.
Set the entities in the model,
and now you've got a really simple model.
Has two entities, couple of attributes,
doesn't do much.
And it's actually a lot of code,
even though none of it's
terribly complicated.
So we're going to bring
Chris Hansen up on stage to show
you why it's not actually as
scary as you might think it is.
CHRIS HANSEN: Can we go to demo one?
Can we go to demo?
There we go.
Thanks, Melissa.
So what I'm going to show you is a
conversion of an existing application,
an existing Cocoa document-based
application,
to use Core Data.
I'm going to show you how it's
actually pretty easy to take
your existing software and bring
it forward to the new world.
So I have a lot of books,
and I like to lend them to my friends.
But I need to keep track of what I lend,
because otherwise I'll just forget.
And then my library will get smaller.
So I have this little
lending library application,
as soon as X comes up here.
And it's very simple.
I'll just start it building
now and walk through the code.
It's a simple Cocoa document-based
application that has just a couple
of very simple model objects,
book and friend, and the document itself.
persists using data
representation of type and load
data representation of type,
just using NSKey to archiving.
Bigger font size.
Got it.
Text editing.
Sorry about that.
Syntax coloring.
Monaco, what do we say, 14.
Bigger than that?
Bigger?
Okay.
That was 18.
There we go.
So its persistence is
really simple right now.
We're just adding a couple--
we're just adding our objects,
our two arrays of books and
friends to a dictionary,
and then writing that dictionary
out using keyed archiving.
The first step in
bringing this forward is,
of course, to duplicate the project.
So I'll just make a copy of this
and open up the new project.
And then I need to actually make a
model for Core Data to work from.
So what I'm going to do is
add a new group called Models.
And then add a new file to that group.
And that new file is going
to be a design data model.
I'm just going to name
it Lending Library.
And here I get to pick
classes to add to that model.
So I'm just going to pick book
and friend and add all the classes
that are in those header files.
And I get a model.
And if I show the class browser here,
or the model browser,
I just went to Design,
chose Show Model Browser.
And let's see,
I'll kick this up for you too.
We can see that it picked up the
actual types of the attributes and
even the type of the relationship
by picking the destination.
However,
that relationship is named toFriend,
and in the actual file here,
It's called Lent2,
so I'm just going to go back here,
and I'm going to change this to Lent2.
Now,
we also can see that here it's actually
set the class names appropriately.
So these model objects will be backed
up by instances of these classes.
However,
right now these classes just descend
from NSObject and implement NSCoding.
Since Core Data is going to manage
all of our persistence and all
of our change tracking for us,
we don't really want to
descend from NSObject anymore.
We want to descend from NSManagedObject.
And since ManagedObject handles
all of our persistence for us,
we don't need to use
NSCoding anymore either.
So we can actually get
rid of these attributes,
and we can even get rid
of this relationship,
I'm going to get rid of
a couple of accessors,
and I can even get rid of
that relationship accessor,
because everything in our interface
is going to be done through
bindings and key value coding.
Now I can also get rid of my DLX method,
because I have no more
storage to manage myself.
Core Data manages all that for you.
I'm going to convert my setAuthor method
to show you how you might want to do
this in your own applications to use
what we call primitive key value coding.
So the first thing I need to do is,
in setAuthor,
I need to inform the rest of the system
that we're going to change the object.
So I'm going to just say self will
change value for key of author.
Then I'm going to actually do a self-set
primitive... didn't complete for me...
Set primitive value for key will actually
call into our superclass implementation,
which manages all the storage for us,
and do the right thing for both
attributes and relationships.
It checks against the entity.
And finally,
I'm going to tell the system that
we did change the value for key.
And this way, if your application uses
your accessor methods,
you don't have to get rid of them
and just go through key value coding.
You can still use your accessor methods.
You can just make them a lot simpler
and act as covers for primitive KVC.
And I need to do the
same thing in author.
I just need to say a string author.
will access ValueForKey.
This tells the framework that we're
going to start accessing that key,
so if it needs to pull
anything into memory,
if it needs to fire any faults,
that will happen.
Then we say author equals
self primitive value for key.
to actually get the data.
Then we say self did
access value for key.
There's a lot of symmetry
in this framework.
and finally we return the
value that we retrieved.
But if you're just
using key value coding,
key value coding will
do all of this for you.
So you don't need to actually
even have these accessors.
If your entire interface is
built through bindings and
you're using key value coding,
you're fine.
And this works both for
attributes and for relationships.
And finally, we also don't need our
NS coding support anymore,
because all of our persistence
is being handled by Core Data.
And we can do the same
thing to our friend object.
We can just convert it to superclass.
Get rid of its IVARs.
Get rid of its accessors.
And, well, let's see.
Pretty much get rid
of all the code in it.
Now we only have a
couple more things to do.
I think three more things.
First, we need-- since Core Data is
managing our persistence,
we can also get rid of the instance
variables that we're using to store
our collections of books and friends.
In our document,
we just need to tell it that
it's not an NS document anymore,
it's an NS persistent document.
We don't need these anymore
because everything's going to be
accessed via key-value coding,
and same with these.
And of course,
we can delete the implementations, too.
So...
We don't need to actually handle
our own persistence anymore,
so we can delete these.
And finally, since we don't have any
more IVARs to memory manage,
we can delete init and dialog, too.
So this is our new document subclass.
Now we only have two more steps.
Our first step is to go in and--
Change the type of
document that we handle.
Right now, I'm just handling a document
type of lending lib.
I'm going to change that
to XML so Core Data knows
to use the XML persistence.
And then I'm going to go
and make a couple minor
modifications to my nib file.
Our nib file still has some knowledge
about the classes that we were using,
and we need to update it.
So our nib file is very simple.
It's just a simple two-tab interface
with a couple of table views,
all set up using bindings.
This application would run fine on
Panther before moving it to Core Data.
We don't actually need to do
anything with the table views.
All we need to do is modify
our array controllers.
So our array controllers right now
point to a class and a class name.
We're going to change them to point
to an entity and an entity name.
So friends points to the friend entity,
and books points to the book entity.
And then we're going to set
one additional binding on
each of the array controllers.
This binding-- well,
and we're going to remove
the content array binding,
because we're not actually getting
the content from the document anymore.
Instead,
we're going to connect the binding
on each of the array controllers
for its managed object context.
And that comes from our document.
Every persistent document has a managed
object context and actually also has
its own persistent store coordinator.
So that handles all of your change
tracking for you automatically.
So I just did that for books.
Let me go do that for friends.
Actually, just object context.
Context, bind, get rid of content array,
save.
And we're set.
So now I'll just build and run this one.
Actually, while I'm building this,
I'll run the original.
And as you can see,
it's just a very simple
document-based app.
Can add an author of a book I have,
say John Brenner, the shockwave writer.
I can add another book that I have,
Douglas Adams.
The Hitchhiker's Guide.
And I can add a couple of my friends,
Ben and their phone numbers in
case I need to contact them because
I need a book back really quickly.
and Melissa.
These aren't their real phone numbers.
Don't try them.
And I can see that in my Lent 2 pop-up,
I can set, oh,
while I lent Ben the Shockwave writer,
I lent Melissa Hitchhiker's
Guide to the Galaxy.
And notice what we don't get.
If I add another book, say, Weinberger,
The Clue Train,
Manifesto, and I want to undo that.
I can undo the typing in there because
that's handled by the text subsystem.
But I can't undo anything in the actual
document because I haven't written
any undo code for this application.
But this is the old version.
Notice also that I don't
get any document dirtying.
Again,
I would have had to write code for that.
I still can save and load documents,
though.
But let's check the new version.
If I run this--
I can start out, I can say John Brunner,
the Shockwave writer.
I can say Douglas Adams.
Hitchhiker's Guide.
I can see that I get all the
same table view behaviors.
I haven't touched this
part of the interface.
There's no value for these pop-up menus
because I haven't added any friends yet.
I can add a couple of friends.
and they show up in the pop-ups.
And all of this relationship management,
all of the persistence that's
going to happen when I hit Save is
going to be handled by Core Data.
But notice what we also got.
We also got dirtying.
The document is now marked as modified.
So if I just try to close it,
it automatically comes up and
asks me if I want to save.
So I'm just going to
save this on the desktop.
I'll just call it My Library.
I rerun the app.
I choose Open.
I go to the desktop.
I open that up,
and everything's in there.
So it's just round
trip through Core Data.
Now I'm going to try adding
Weinberger's book again,
Weinberger, the Kluetrain Manifesto.
But I lost that book.
It's not in my library anymore.
So I'm just going to undo.
I can undo that, and I can undo that.
And then I can go up here, and I can see,
oh, I can redo those insertions.
So I just redid the add of that record.
Now I redid the update of that record,
and now I redid the
update of that record.
And that all came for free
just by using Core Data.
So now I'm going to turn it over to Ben,
who's going to tell
you a little bit more.
Good morning.
My name is Ben Trumbull,
and I'm one of the senior engineers
with Chris and Melissa in the
Development Technologies Group at Apple.
And I'm going to talk to you
today about the two classes that
you'll probably interact with the
most in the Core Data framework.
And the first is NSManagedObject.
If you take something
away from this session,
if you're looking for a noun
to work with from Core Data,
you'll probably find it here.
So NSMagic objects are
instances of an entity.
And they always have an entity
description in the same way that
a Cocoa object always has a class.
So it's the data equivalent.
They're a generic data object.
So as Chris showed you,
you don't need to use storage.
You can just have it go through and
magically will manage the memory for you.
You can use key value coding to access
those fields and get back the values.
It's a basic unit that you're
going to be working with.
These are the objects
that you push around.
You fetch, insert, change, save,
et cetera.
And they all implement key value
coding and key value observing for you.
The fundamentals is each instance
is described by a single entity
and has a reference to it.
Each one has a unique object ID,
and each one is associated with
a single managed object context,
which we'll get more to later.
It's important to note that each managed
object can only be used by a single
managed object context at a time.
And subclasses can
implement custom logic.
As you saw in the demo that Chris did,
a lot of times you don't really need
any custom logic in your subclasses.
You don't have to have the subclass.
You can just say in your nib or whatnot
that you're going to use the entity,
and we'll automatically just
use the generic superclass,
and it'll get all the behavior
for you as long as you don't need
any accessors or anything custom.
So to take a brief tangent,
it's interesting to note that the
IDs that are unique for each managed
object are objects in and of themselves.
And they're an instance
of NSManagedObjectID.
And one useful feature of this is that
different managed objects with the same
ID refer to the same persistent data.
So if you have two objects and
they have equivalent object IDs,
then they refer to the same
XML node and an XML file or the
same row in an SQLite database.
So one of the things that you
can implement either in the model
or in a subclass is validation.
And the managed objects do
validation upon themselves.
These validation callbacks
are invoked at save time.
So you'll get a callback for deletion,
insertion, or updates.
And you can also validate
on individual properties.
I have lost my formatting.
But at the very bottom there,
you'll see Validate Key.
And key here is not the method name,
but the name of the property
that you're validating.
So in the previous example,
you might have Validate
Book or Validate Friend.
And you can just go through
in your subclass to validate
on an individual property.
Other useful managed object callbacks are
Awake from Fetch and Awake from Insert.
Here's a great place for you to
initialize transient properties or to set
up any caches or do any calculations that
you want to set aside for the object.
And two other callbacks for
you are WillSave and DidSave.
And a subclass can do
something interesting here.
The Awake methods are
generally more useful,
just to set up initialization.
So to talk a little bit more
about primitive key value coding,
these are the methods you use
to implement custom accessors,
setters and getters.
There's a primitive value for key
and a set primitive value for key.
They're only for your use in the
implementation of an accessor method.
The framework uses them to
do low-level initialization,
to do bit shuffling, and stuff like that.
They don't go through the
regular key value coding,
and they don't perform
any kind of validation,
any kind of argument checking.
They assume you kind of
know what you're doing.
So they're fairly low-level,
and they don't manage any of
the integrity for relationships.
To create a managed object,
typically you'll just do a fetch.
As you saw in Chris's example,
When he opened up the document,
they just come up for you,
and they're automatically created for
you and registered with their context.
If you want to create a new one,
you just alloc insertWithEntity
and give it an entity.
And after that,
you pass it to its context,
and you say insert object.
One other thing you can do is if
you decide to use Core Data without
its native persistence mechanism,
you can use your own persistence
mechanism or use the NSCoding
behavior you already have,
and just use the context to do
change tracking and do the undo/redo,
and you can do the saving yourself.
In this case, you can use registered
object to tell the context,
this isn't a new object.
It doesn't need to be
inserted into the data file.
You've pulled it off from some
other data store somewhere,
and you just want it to know
about the object to track changes.
So the NSManage objects
have all the nouns.
They have the entity description.
They have the object ID.
They have all the data
from the data store.
The verbs live here in the
NSManage object context.
So this section, a lot goes on here.
So we have a little preview.
So we're going to talk
about fundamentals.
I have a slide on fetching, inserting,
deleting, updating, saving, reverting,
notifications, memory management,
and threading.
Like I said, a lot of verbs with the
Manage Object context.
So this is the primary center
of the framework for your use.
It initiates all the actions,
and it does all the heavy
lifting for the change tracking.
It performs retrieval of the
objects from the external store.
It does the saving and
the reverting of changes.
It implements undo and redo.
It propagates the deletes
and maintains the inverses.
And the exact behavior of the delete
propagation and whatnot happens
based on what you've set in your
model in the energy description.
And it also is involved at the
center of all the activities.
So it's the one that posts the
notifications and does the callbacks.
For fetching--
It's a little small,
but there's an execute
fetch request method.
And you just pass it a fetch request,
and the managed object context goes
off and figures out who to pass that
request to to have it fulfilled.
The only mandatory part of a
fetch request is the entity,
and everything else will
do a useful default.
One important feature to note
is that the context will merge
in changes that are pending,
that haven't been saved out,
into the results of the fetch.
So if you have a bunch of inserted
objects and a bunch of deleted objects,
and you execute a fetch,
if the predicate that describes
the search you're doing
matches the insert objects,
those will get included in
the results you get back.
And the deleted objects will be excluded.
And changed objects will
be included if they match.
But if you change an
object so it's no longer
True, when it values to the predicate,
then it will be excluded as well.
And you can always create a
new managed context and do
the fetch directly with that,
or you can do a reset.
So walk through a little
bit the fetch control flow.
In this diagram here,
A is the fetch request.
Turns out graphic artists are very,
very literal.
Yes.
So you create the fetch request,
and you pass it to the
NSManageObject context.
It takes the fetch request,
it does some work with it,
and then it passes it to its
persistent store coordinator.
Then the Persistent
Store Coordinator figures out
which object stores have the
relevant data and passes it off.
So you can have multiple stores.
You'll get back some results.
Each of the stores does the fetch
with its own native mechanism,
whether it's an SQL query for SQLite or
walking through the XML for an XML file.
And then the results come back,
and they get collated,
and it brings them back.
And they're sorted.
And the NSManagedObjectContext
merges in the change set so that
the fetch accurately reflects what
it knows as the state of the world.
OK, so we've talked a little
bit about inserting.
All you do is invoke insert object
with your new managed object that
you alloc and hit it with entity.
It's best to define the initial values
after you've performed the insertion.
The reason for this is context only track
changes after they know about objects.
And they only know about objects
after you've called insert
object or register object.
And you won't get the correct undo redo
behavior if you set a whole bunch of
initial values and then you insert it,
because the managed object context will
assume that that was the initial state.
So as you saw in the demo,
you can undo the text edits that way.
And when you're done,
you'll just have a blank row.
Deleting an object,
you just pass the managed object
to delete object on the context.
The deletes will be propagated through
the relationships that that object has.
And the exact behavior will depend
on which delete rule you've set.
We also talked about the
different delete rules,
nullify, cascade, deny, or no action.
It's important to note
that if you use no action,
this means you have assumed
responsibility for maintaining the
integrity of those relationships.
So if you've got objects
with pointers to each other,
and you say no action
when you delete one,
you're going to get dangling pointers,
and you've promised that
you will clean that up.
Another important thing to note is
just because you've deleted an object,
it's pending.
This doesn't take effect until you save.
So this is a perfectly good object.
You can keep working with it,
asking for data.
It's valid.
And you can undo the delete.
So it's really a pending of a delete.
A lot of things happen
when the objects change.
And this is really an overview of
what's going on behind the scenes.
You don't really have to
worry much about this,
but this is what the
context is doing for you.
A key value coding observation
notification gets posted
by the object itself.
And the managed object context
receives an internal callback.
At this time, if it's necessary,
it takes a snapshot of that
object so it can maintain the
correct undo/redo behavior.
And then,
it makes sure that the bidirectional
relationships are maintained.
And it flags the object as
updated and queues it up.
It also queues up an end
of event notification.
So, it tries to minimize the amount
of work it does for each change.
So if you do a whole bunch
of sets with key value coding
or with an accessor method,
it doesn't want to take up too much time.
And it will coalesce things
later at the end of the event.
So at the end of the run loop,
we get our callback back to ourselves.
We coalesce all the changes together.
We push an action,
a single action for each object,
onto the undo manager stack.
And we pass up a notification for
you if you want to know about it.
And that's the point where the bindings
receive some of the notifications.
And it's one of the points of
integration with the Cocoa bindings.
Thanks.
For saving changes,
there's just a save method.
You can pass in an NSError if
you want to find out what
happens when things go wrong,
if things go wrong.
And this is the same
control flow as the fetch,
except you don't get any results back.
We group all the insertions together
and the deletions and the updates.
We pass it to the persistent
store coordinator,
and the persistent store coordinator
figures out where everything goes.
And then each store writes it out.
So reverting changes,
you can use the rollback method.
This just does a simple revert and
restores all the objects to their
state before they were-- sorry,
the same state they had
when they were last saved.
So this will throw away insertions.
It'll undo changes.
And deleted objects will now go
back to their previous normal state.
You can also do a reset.
So the reset will basically take
this context and flush it and
restore it to its initial state.
It'll forget about all
the objects it's seen.
And you can just reuse it.
It's useful if the context belongs
to something else like the nib.
And you don't want to
replace it with a new one.
But it's a similar effect
to just creating a new one.
And it also has the
undo and redo methods.
These use the NSUndoManager.
You can get a hold of the Manage
Object Context UndoManager and
customize its own behavior,
like set levels of undo or
throw away all the actions,
remove all actions.
So it's just integration with the
default foundation NSUndoManager.
notifications.
The one that's most
useful is the first one,
the objects changed in managing context.
And this happens at the end of the event.
After we've done all the changes and
we've coalesced everything together,
you can find out what other people
have done to your soup of objects.
Then when you do a save,
after the save operation is successful,
we post this notification.
The Managed Context did
save changes notification.
And that might be useful if
you want to know who's been
committing changes to the file.
The User Info Dictionary has the same
structure for both these notifications.
There's an inserted key, lowercase i,
updated and deleted keys.
And both these keys map to a value,
which is an NSSet.
And the set contains all of the
managed objects that are inserted,
updated, or deleted.
And it's also important to note
that the managed object makes
themselves individually post key
value observing notifications with
the normal foundation mechanism.
So just a brief overview on this.
We touched briefly in the demo
about faulting and why you have to
call will access or will change,
followed by did access or did change.
And that's so that we can do faulting,
where we basically prune
objects that you're not using.
And then if there's a relationship
and you want to do something,
we'll go and we'll fetch it for
you to try to reduce the amount
of stuff you have in memory.
This is particularly useful
with the SQLite database.
So this is analogous to
kind of virtual memory.
So it's that kind of faulting.
When we talk about faulting,
it's at a higher level
than page faulting,
but it's basically the same sense there.
You don't really have to worry about it.
It's fairly transparent.
You touch something,
and we'll bring it into memory.
And then Core Data, for the most part,
is a big cache of things.
And faulting is adding or
replacing the cache lines.
So your working set is
mostly the changed objects.
And you may have fetched other
objects to work with them or whatnot.
But once you're done with them,
then we're going to keep
little shells of them around.
But we don't need all the
data because it's still there.
And this could probably be
a session in its own right,
so I'm not going to say much about it,
so I don't say anything wrong.
But locking and unlocking the managed
object context is pretty useful.
It implements an NS recursive lock,
so you can use it that way.
But it's not just for thread safety.
It's important to signal to the
framework that you're using this context,
and it's basically
wrapping a transaction.
So this prevents other threads
from interspersing their changes,
mixing up the undo stack,
or you save a bunch of
threads changes together.
This is why it's not enough to just
lock in between an insert operation and
then unlock after the insert operation.
You want to group a whole
bunch of things together,
and this is how you do that.
It also prevents the framework
from processing notifications
that might interrupt your state.
So basically,
it's a signal that you're using
this managed object context,
and then you unlock it when
you're done with your transaction.
Great.
And now Melissa's going to come on,
and she's going to tell you about the
rest of the framework underneath it.
Just a pretty quick
section to wrap up on.
Thank you.
Thanks, Ben.
So the stuff Ben and I have talked about
so far is pretty much the stuff you're
most likely to have to interact with.
But there are lower
levels in this framework,
and this is sort of a quick overview for
those who like to know how things work.
You probably won't have to
do much coding at this level,
but if you do, or if you're just curious,
this is how it works.
Each managed object context has
a persistent store coordinator.
The persistent store coordinator is
pretty much the bridge between the
object lifecycle management part of our
stack and the persistence mechanisms.
In many ways,
it's like the managed object
context and the managed objects
are the center of your world.
The persistent store coordinator is
the center of the framework's world.
You have one persistent store
coordinator per stack and only one,
but you can have many contexts.
You can have many stores using
that persistent store coordinator.
It's really the thing
in the middle that does,
well, coordination.
The really important part about
it is that it provides a facade
of a single object stored in
the managed object context.
The managed object context knows
that it has to talk to one thing.
It doesn't care what that thing is,
it has to talk to one thing.
And we initialize it with
a managed object model.
That's important because this is where
the managed object context and the
underlying stores get their model.
I mentioned that a persistent store
coordinator can have multiple stores.
Object stores are things you interact
with in this release only through
the NS Persistent Store Coordinator,
but so you know,
they're the actual persistent
backing store mechanism.
We have three stores that
we provide this release,
XML, SQLite, and Binary.
Each store type has its own
advantages and disadvantages,
and you can move data
between stores transparently,
or almost transparently.
They said we provide three
stores and they each have
advantages and disadvantages.
The binary store is fast,
but it only operates on
the whole object graph.
Your entire collection of objects
that you're persisting comes into
memory and is saved as one unit.
This is fine if you've got a small
application but can get unwieldy if
you've got something with thousands
or hundreds of thousands of objects.
The XML file is very much
like the Binary Object Store,
only it's XML.
It's a bit slower,
but it is externally parsable.
So if you're building an
application whose data you want
to share with other applications,
this might be the way you want to go.
And then we have the SQLite store.
Scalable.
It's easily the fastest store.
And most importantly,
it gives you the partial
object graph management.
This is the only one of the stores
that gives you faulting out of the box.
You don't need to worry about
which objects get read into memory.
As long as you're doing the will
access and did access methods,
The object graph management context
will take care of pulling everything
in and out of the SQLite store for you.
So now we're going to talk a little
bit about how you initialize a stack.
It's actually-- that covers
most of what you need to know.
You create the URL for the location
of where you're going to find
your model and create a model.
Initialize the persistent store
coordinator with the model.
Tell the persistent store coordinator,
add persistent store with type.
In this case, we're using an NSXML store.
And the URL where you want
that data to be stored.
We create a managed object context and
set its persistent store coordinator.
At this point,
you have a stack that's fully ready to
have managed objects pushed into it,
managed objects pulled out of it.
Of course,
as Chris showed you in the demo earlier,
that's how much initialization
you've got to do if you're using
a document-based application.
We do it all for you.
Some more details about
working with stores.
There's a few other things
you might want to do.
Here we're doing the same kind
of creation and adding of a store
that we did in the previous slide.
But we're also showing
you how to migrate.
It's pretty simple.
Create a URL and tell the persistent
store coordinator to migrate
data from store one to another
store created at that new URL.
Once you've done that,
you might want to remove the old store.
Again, it's simple.
Tell the persistent store
coordinator to remove it.
But once you've done that,
it's really important for you to do this.
You have to reset the
managed object context.
Object graphs can be complicated.
And if you remove a store,
you've essentially removed the underlying
backing for a part of your context.
You need to reset the context so
that all the objects that were in
that store will get flushed out.
Don't forget,
if you see confusing behavior,
you might have forgotten.
Now we're going to bring Chris back up,
and he's going to show you a demo of how
you can use the Core Data frameworks to
stripe objects across multiple stores.
Thanks, Melissa.
I'd just like to point out one
other thing with the document-based
application that I showed.
In here--
I forgot to mention that we don't
implement any storage methods.
But if you have a legacy application
that already has a file format,
you can override the main entry points
for the document loading and saving
and still handle your own file format.
So you can just get objects into memory
from your file format and insert them
into your document's context and then
use Core Data to save them out again.
But here, I've built a little application
for looking at the WWDC schedule.
I just got an XML version of the
schedule for a couple of days.
And I actually built just a
standard Cocoa application.
I didn't build a Core Data application.
So I just created a basic
application delegate,
just like you would see
in any Cocoa example.
And in its init method,
for when it's instantiated
in the Nib file,
I have the initialization
of its managed object model,
its persistent store coordinator,
and a managed object context
to use for the application.
So here,
I'm just getting a model from our bundle.
are getting the Path to
a Model from our bundle.
I'm actually instantiating that model.
I'm creating a persistent store
coordinator that refers to that model.
And finally,
I'm creating a managed object
context that is attached to that
persistent store coordinator.
And let's start this
building and running.
Now here I just have a basic
table view all done with bindings,
and I have a button.
This button has one action method,
and that action method is AddStore.
And what this does is it brings
up an open panel and grabs a
store from a file and adds it.
So I can go in here.
I can pick Monday's schedule.
And I see all of the sessions that
were on Monday and their day and
time and the room they were in.
But notice that this is fairly generic.
I just get the first URL that
I've selected in my OpenPanel,
and add it.
This means-- oh, and then I tell my array
controller that's connected
to the table view to fetch.
And the new fetch method on array
controller will actually go out to its
managed object context and run a fetch.
So if I click Add Store again,
it goes through the same steps.
And I can pick Tuesday's schedule,
and Tuesday's schedule
shows up in my table view.
But if I sort this by day and time,
I see that Tuesday's sessions
were added to Monday's sessions.
This is actually a managed object,
one managed object context connected
to one persistent store coordinator
that's now connected to two stores.
Both of these are XML stores,
but they don't have to be.
One could be an XML store and
one could be an SQL store.
And that's it.
This is a very simple code,
barely any in fact, and it lets you work
with multiple stores,
all from one context.
So I guess I'm going back to Melissa.
There's some random other stuff.
Didn't really fit anywhere
else in the presentation,
so this is the other stuff section.
We've mentioned,
Chris mentioned during the demo,
and it's sort of been
alluded to a few other times,
we have a NS persistent document.
It's a subclass of NS document
that integrates with the
Core Database persistence and object
management stuff automatically.
You don't need to think about it,
just create it,
we do everything else for you.
It's got full undo redo support,
document dirtying,
and it does provide hooks for
configuring the stack if you
want to do something special.
If you want to create a
document-based application using
models for multiple frameworks,
we provide hooks for that.
that let you do that.
We've got, as we said,
Cocoa Bindings integration.
The big takeaway message
here is it just works.
Managed object can be bound
like any other object that
supports key value coding.
You get undo,
reduce support through the context.
And as you saw in Chris's demo,
the controllers are now model aware,
so you can drive it all using the models.
And the array controller actually
has a field that will allow you to
configure an NSFetchRequest to fetch
context from the object context.
So if you want an array controller
that only contains a subset of
the objects in your context,
you can build an NS predicate
that fetches only those objects.
Well, that's actually about all
we've got to talk about.
You're going to get, in the WWDC CD,
you've all got a seed.
It's already got a fair
amount of documentation for
which we thank our doc team.
Some pieces aren't
quite fully functional.
The SQLite support only supports
basic fetching and updating.
The live controllers aren't as
live as we'd like them to be,
and the fetch properties
don't fully work.
There isn't any localization,
and there's no optimization,
but please try it out,
and if you find something,
submit bug reports.
We like bug reports.
They tell us what parts of
the stack people are using,
what parts they don't really care about,
what problems they're having with things.
So, things you should remember.
Core Data is model-driven.
It gives you object graph management,
object graph persistency, Cocoa bindings,
and some additions to Cocoa bindings.
It helps you solve difficult problems.
Things like undo, redo, and scalability.
Both of these are
actually relatively hard,
as many of you know who've had
to solve these problems before.
We do it for you.
We support a variety
of persistent stores.
You pick which particular
storage mechanism you want.
We have support in Xcode and
Interface Builder at the user
interface level for allowing you to
build applications using Core Data.
And you'll write a lot less code,
as Chris showed you in his demo, a lot,
lot less code.
You don't even need classes.
You can just use NSManagedObject.
Before we go to the question and answer,
I want to point out this slide.
Big slide.
Report bugs.
Griping on the list, talking on the list,
that's all well and good, but you know,
Apple engineering is bug driven.
Submit bugs if you want us to fix things.